It is one of the largest mosques in Asia. It was built by Nawab Shahjehan. Its entrance is two-storeyed. It has four arches and there are 9 entrances to go to the main prayer hall. The entire building is very beautiful. The three-day Ijtema held here invites people from all over the country. Situated on the banks of the big lake in front of Shaukat Mahal, this beautiful example of architecture belongs to the period of Qudsia Begum, who was also known as Gohar Begum. It is a wonderful confluence of Hindu and Mughal art. It is a unique national institution of India. It is mainly a center for performing arts and visual arts. It is designed by Charles Correa. The natural beauty around this building spread over a vast area makes it even more grand. There is an art museum, art gallery, workshop for fine arts, a theatre, indoor and outdoor auditorium, rehearsal rooms, library of Indian poetry, classical and folk music museum. It is open all week except Mondays from 2 pm to 8 pm. This is a unique museum spread over 200 acres on Shyamla Hills in front of the big lake. It is on a prehistoric site and is the only museum of its kind in the world which is near caves decorated with prehistoric paintings. And thus it is connected to objects and traditions in a lively manner. Samples of tribal, seaside, desert and Himalayan dwellings have also been made here. Here in the museum there is a library, audio-visual archive, computerized room and species samples can be seen. Beautiful samples of art have been collected and kept here from different parts of Madhya Pradesh. The museum is closed on Mondays. It is situated on Arera Hills. There is a museum attached to it where art samples collected from Raisen, Sehore, Mandsaur and Shahdol districts of Madhya Pradesh are kept. This museum is also open from 9 am to 5 pm throughout the week except Monday. This safari park is situated on the hill adjacent to the big lake. It is spread over 445 hectares. You can enjoy seeing various types of vegetarian and non-vegetarian animals amidst natural beauty. It is open every day from 7 am to 11 am and 3 pm to 5 pm except Tuesday. It is basically a science museum located amidst the beauty of Shyamala Hills. There are Invention and Fun Science galleries and also a planetarium named Taramandal. It is open every day from 10.30 am to 6.30 pm except Monday. The old mosques and havelis in the square situated in the middle of the city remind us of the past. The narrow lanes are lined with shops displaying the treasures of crafts. Here you can see and buy silver jewellery, beadwork, embroidery work and sequin work in a beautiful style. The big lake is separated from the small lake by an overbridge. The MP Tourism Boat Club also organises boating in the big lake. The small lake has a fish-shaped aquarium. How to reach? There are regular flights to Bhopal from Delhi, Gwalior, Indore and Mumbai. Bhopal is on the Delhi-Madras main line. The main trains from Mumbai to Delhi via Itarsi and Jhansi pass through Bhopal. There are regular bus services between Bhopal and Indore, Mandu, Ujjain, Khajuraho, Pachmarhi, Gwalior, Sanchi, Jabalpur and Shivpuri. For stay - there are hotels of Madhya Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation and private hotels. When to go? You can visit here any time of the year. The splendor of Orchha is captured in the stones, time seems to have stopped here and we go back years, to a medieval city. Where the shine of the temples and palaces has not been faded even by the fog of time. These buildings built by Bundela rulers in the 16th to 17th century tell the story of ancient splendor. Orchha was founded in the 16th century by Bundela Rajput Rudra Pratap. The kings who came after him added to its glory by building magnificent buildings and structures. Among them, the name of Raja Bir Singh Judev is prominent. The beautiful artwork of Bundela art is worth seeing in the temples and palaces. The artistry of the walls and ceilings of the Lakshminarayan temple and the Rajmahal tell the story of prosperity here. This palace was built by Raja Bir Singh Judev in the 17th century before Jahangir came to Orchha. The delicately made chhatris create a wonderful balance with its strong walls and this gives the entire building a very prosperous impression. This palace in the shape of a quadrilateral was built by Madhukar Shah in the 17th century. Inside, there are unique craftsmanship of bright colors with religiousness. It is built between two artificial ponds Munj Talab and Kapur Talab. Probably, it was built by Sultan Ghiyasuddin Khilji as a big harem. Its open corridors, projecting balconies and beautiful roofs easily express the royal taste. It is very pleasant to see it from the Taveli Mahal at night. It was built as a sitting arrangement for the audience. The walls around it are slightly inclined due to which it is called Hindola Mahal. A unique example of carving in sandstone can be seen here. The beautiful pillars here captivate the mind. There are many small buildings near this palace which tell the story of its past. It is an unmatched example of Afghan art. Fascinated by its dome, Shah Jahan sent his four architectural experts here before building the Taj Mahal. The corridor of the mosque is decorated with pillars and arches. It was built to supply water to Roopmati's palace. Now it is known as a holy place. A panoramic view of the entire Mandu can be seen from here. It was built for the soldiers to keep an eye on the entire area. From this magnificent building, one can see the palace of Baz Bahadur and the river Narmada flowing in the plains of Nimad. It is said that Baz Bahadur built this tall palace because of the queen's habit of taking food and water after visiting the Narmada every day. There is a temple of Lord Shiva here, to go inside one has to climb down the stairs. The beauty of this temple cannot be described in words. A stream from the pond surrounded by trees keeps on anointing Lord Shiva. This palace located near the temple was built by Shah Badga Khan for Akbar's Hindu wife. Samples of Akbar's art can be seen on its walls. Hathi Mahal, Dariya Khan's Mazar, Dai's Palace, Dai's younger sister's palace, Malik Maghat's mosque and Jali Mahal are also worth seeing. There is always a crowd of tourists at the Echo Point here. Lohani caves and the Sunset Point situated in front of them also attract tourists. How to go: Indore Airport is the nearest airport at 99 kms. which is connected to Mumbai, Delhi and Bhopal. Regular bus services are available from Indore, Dhar, Mhow, Ujjain and Bhopal. Ratlam Railway Station (124 kms.) is on the Mumbai-Delhi main line and Indore is 99 kms. When to go: The best time to visit here is from July to March. At this time, tourists are in large numbers here. Earlier, there was a strong Ranthambore Fort on a high hill, which was full of population. In order to capture it, a ruler had laid siege to the foothills for a year. Ranthambore Fort, which has faced many wars and witnessed the rise and fall of many kings and nawabs, is built on a hill 401 meters above sea level. At its foothills, there is a dense forest in an area of ​​392 square meters, which is called the National Wildlife Park. Apart from tigers, leopards, deer, chital, nilgai, wild boar and many types of birds are found here in large numbers. There is only one road to the main gate to reach the fort and the garden. This fort was built in 994. Inside the fort, remains of palaces, chhatris, military cantonment, Hindu-Jain temples, mosque and fakir's dargah can also be seen. The Ganesh temple here is still the center of devotion for the devotees where a fair is held every year on Bhadrapaksha Sudi Chaturthi. People also circumambulate the fort on foot. In 1192, Prithviraj Chauhan's grandson Govinda ruled here. Later his son Baghbhatt beautified the city settled in the fort. In 1282, Chauhan dynasty king Hamir was ruling here. In 1290, Jalaluddin Khilji attacked it thrice and tried to conquer it. Later, he conquered it in 1301 after laying siege to it for a year.

After Hamir's death, the Chauhans' rule ended. The Muslim conquerors destroyed the strong wall of the fort. The rulers of Malwa established their rule in the 16th century. Rana Sanga stayed here and strengthened his army. To defeat Rana Sanga, the Mughals attacked here several times, in which Rana Sanga was injured several times.

After his defeat, this fort came under the control of the Mughals. Mughal ruler Shah Alam gave this fort as a reward to Maharaja Sawai Madho Singh I of Jaipur in 1754. Since then, it was kept safe for the Maharaja's hunting. The Maharaja himself built Padam Talab, Raja Bandh and Milk Talab here. Jogi Mahal is built near Padam Talab and at the foot of the fort, which is now a forest department rest house. Common tourists are not allowed entry here. Apart from Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh, former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi has also come to the park to see tigers. Ranthambore Fort is about 200 km from Jaipur. 30 open jeeps and 15 centers are contracted for touring the National Wildlife Park. This area remains closed for three months after June 30 during the rainy season. About 35 km of the forest is covered in three hours by these vehicles. Bhanu Pratap Singh, who has been driving in this area for the last fifteen years, said that the number of tourists is constantly increasing, but tigers are rarely seen. There are about fifteen posts of the forest department in the forest. The forest workers also patrol with sticks in empty hands. This area is divided into Kare Zone and Buffer Zone. These glaciers remain covered with a beautiful sheet of snow for eight months in a year. On the other side, there are beautiful valleys which are covered with beautiful flowers and trees with colorful leaves. You must have seen many picturesque scenes of this beautiful country in Yash Chopra's films. After seeing them, you too must be feeling like getting lost in these beautiful valleys. In this issue, you can take a tour with us in these beautiful valleys of Switzerland. Let's start this journey from Interlaken Ost. Interlaken Ost is said to be the favorite place of Bollywood. In this city full of natural beauty, you can meet both the history and the present of Switzerland. If you have a little time and courage, then it is very pleasant to walk on the hills here at sunrise. If you cannot go on foot, then a train goes straight to the top of the hill from here. Buy a ticket without fail. And enjoy the view of beautiful Switzerland from the top of the hill. Scotland is a country of beautiful castles. A country which is known by history for its great warriors, the unique music of bagpipers and men wearing skirts. This province of lively people is something else. It is better than heaven for the travellers. If you are a fan of clean air, clear water and beautiful valleys, then Scotland is your destination. The special thing about this place is that its sandy beaches have remained untouched by the eyes of people. Therefore, the natural beauty of this place has not been eclipsed by modernity. But nature is also no less kind to this place. If you want to see the unique beauty of nature in solitude, away from the crowd, then Scotland has a lot to offer you. Although Scotland is a state under the United Kingdom. But it has its own cabinet. Moreover, the colour of the currency and the pictures on it are also different from the London pound. On visiting and talking to people here, it is known that the people here are a little annoyed with the British government. This city of beautiful castles has very beautiful grass courts. These have been converted into the best golf courses in the world. Glasgow, which is called heaven for golf lovers, has 40 of the best golf courts in the world. Golf is not only played here but is also taught. If you also want to try your hand at the white ball and stick, then you must visit Glasgow. Paris - The streets and corners here are immersed in unique beauty everywhere. While wandering in the streets here, you will feel that the entire life of the French people is dedicated to art. As far as possible, visit this clean, beautiful country in the summer season. Because in winter the temperature here is seen below minus degrees.

In summer the weather here is very pleasant. In the pleasant morning of this season you will see French people enjoying coffee and 'loaf bread' in Pistro. Pistro is called restaurant in the local language. After coming to Paris, do not forget to enjoy French bread. Here in summer the sun sets at 9 o'clock, due to which you get a lot of time to see Paris. The joy of seeing Paris from the top floor of the 321 meter high Eiffel Tower is something else. There are three floors in the upper part of the tower. There is an excellent lift arrangement to reach the Eiffel Tower.